docs: ADR-009 to revamp testing framework (#1157)
cosmos/ibc-rs: docs/architecture/adr-009-revamp-testkit.md

# ADR 009: Revamp IBC integration test framework

## Changelog

- 04-03-2024: Initial draft

## Context

The current framework in the IBC testkit uses
[existing types and injects state or dependency
manually](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/v0.51.0/ibc-testkit/tests/core/ics02_client/update_client.rs#L574-L578).
Sometimes, it uses
[semantically wrong data as mock data](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/v0.51.0/ibc-testkit/src/testapp/ibc/core/types.rs#L320).
Because of this, tests with customizable steps and fixed fixtures became ad-hoc
and unmaintainable.

To overcome this, we need to improve our test framework that allows:

- testing different implementations (traits).
- succinct tests (useful `util` methods).

> - improving test coverage (Merkle proof generation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- improving test coverage (i.e. validating Merkle proof generation).
```

- integration tests exercising the IBC workflow (relayer-like interface)

## Decision

The main goal of this proposal is to create a test framework that is modular and
closer to the real blockchain environment. This should also make the existing
tests succinct and readable. Instead of bootstrapping the mock data, we should
use valid steps to generate it - so that we know the exact steps to reach a
state to reproduce in a real environment.

> To achieve this, we have broken down the proposal into sub-proposals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To achieve this, we have broken down the proposal into sub-proposals:
```

> ### Adopt a Merkle store for the test framework

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 1. Adopt a Merkle store for the test framework
```

The current framework uses `HashMap` and `HashSet` to store data. This works for
many test scenarios, but it fails to test proof-sensitive scenarios. Because of
this, we don't have any connection, channel handshake or packet relay tests for

> Tendermint light client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this, we don't have any connection, channel handshake, or packet relay tests that
cover the Tendermint light client.
```

We generalize
[`MockContext`](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/v0.51.0/ibc-testkit/src/testapp/ibc/core/types.rs#L103)
to use a Merkle store which is used for IBC Context's store. For concrete or

> default implementation, we can use the IAVL Merkle store implementation from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
default implementations, we can use the IAVL Merkle store implementation from
```

`informalsystems/basecoin-rs`.

> ### Modularize the host environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 2. Modularize the host environment
```

Currently, we are using `Mock` and `SyntheticTendermint`
[variants](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/v0.51.0/ibc-testkit/src/hosts/block.rs#L33-L36)

> as the host environments. To manage these two different environments, we also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as host environments. To manage these two different environments, we also
```

introduced
[`HostBlocks`](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/v0.51.0/ibc-testkit/src/hosts/block.rs#L72-75)

> for corresponding host variants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for encapsulating the possible host variants that need to be covered by `ibc-testkit`.
```

> This creates friction if we have to add a new host variant. It creates the same

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this creates friction in the case when we need to add new host variants. It creates the same
```

> problem as why we have `ibc-derive` crate for `ClientState` and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
problem that the `ibc-derive` crate was designed to solve for `ClientState` and `ConsensusState` types.
```

Reviewer: Additionally, can we summarize the actual problem here, e.g.: "It creates the same problem that the `ibc-derive` crate was designed to solve for `ClientState` and `ConsensusState` types, namely that: `[problem summary]`"

Author: d86ddadb

`ConsensusState`. This should be refactored by a generic `TestHost` trait that
maintains its corresponding types e.g. `Block` types, via associated types.
Finally, we generalize the `MockContext` once more to use this `TestHost` trait
instead of a concrete enum variant.

This `TestHost` trait should be responsible for generating blocks, headers,

> client and consensus states specific to that host environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
client, and consensus states specific to that host environment.
```

```rs
/// TestHost is a trait that defines the interface for a host blockchain.

> pub trait TestHost: Default + Debug + Sized {

Reviewer: Is there an analogous "production" version of this trait? If there is, I'm curious what the discrepancies are between this test version and the production version.

Author: Of course. I should link these new concepts to the concrete implementations.

https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/rano/testkit/adr-009/ibc-testkit/src/hosts/mod.rs#L27

    /// The type of block produced by the host.
    type Block: TestBlock;

    /// The type of client state produced by the host.
    type ClientState: Into<AnyClientState> + Debug;

>     /// The type of block parameters to produce a block

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// The type of block parameters to produce a block.
```

    type BlockParams: Debug + Default;

>     /// The type of light client parameters to produce a light client state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// The type of light client parameters to produce a light client state.
```

    type LightClientParams: Debug + Default;

    /// The history of blocks produced by the host chain.

>     fn history(&self) -> &VecDeque<Self::Block>;

Reviewer: Is double-ended pushing and popping from the history a common use-case for the block history? In other words, does this need to be a `VecDeque` and not just a regular `Vec`?

Author: Ah, very good point. Maybe we can go with `Vec` here. We have `VecDeque` in production, as we need to prune older history for some test scenarios.

Reviewer: If we need to test situations where older history needs to be pruned by popping from the front of the `VecDeque`, then I think that is enough to justify using it here.

Author: I looked at the implementation and realized that we don't really need it. It is mainly called together with `MockIbcStore::prune_host_consensus_states_till` to have a pruned host consensus state history.

https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/d86ddadbf8d1b01c2e0015428f39b23b5043f1fa/ibc-testkit/src/context.rs#L200-L203

I see that we only have one test for this - and that too calls `MockIbcStore::prune_host_consensus_states_till` directly.

https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/d86ddadbf8d1b01c2e0015428f39b23b5043f1fa/ibc-testkit/tests/core/ics03_connection/conn_open_try.rs#L71

Maybe we can make this `Vec` and remove `pruned_block_till`.

>     /// Triggers the advancing of the host chain, by extending the history of blocks (or headers).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// Triggers the advancing of the host chain by extending the history of blocks (or headers).
```

    fn advance_block(
        &mut self,
        commitment_root: Vec<u8>,
        block_time: Duration,
        params: &Self::BlockParams,
    );

    /// Generate a block at the given height and timestamp, using the provided parameters.
    fn generate_block(
        &self,
        commitment_root: Vec<u8>,
        height: u64,
        timestamp: Timestamp,
        params: &Self::BlockParams,
    ) -> Self::Block;

    /// Generate a client state using the block at the given height and the provided parameters.
    fn generate_client_state(
        &self,
        latest_height: &Height,
        params: &Self::LightClientParams,
    ) -> Self::ClientState;
}

/// TestBlock is a trait that defines the interface for a block produced by a host blockchain.
pub trait TestBlock: Clone + Debug {

>     /// The type of header can be extracted from the block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// The type of header that can be extracted from the block.
```

    type Header: TestHeader;

    /// The height of the block.
    fn height(&self) -> Height;

    /// The timestamp of the block.
    fn timestamp(&self) -> Timestamp;

    /// Extract the header from the block.

>     fn into_header(self) -> Self::Header;

Reviewer: Why does this method take `self` and not `&self`. Does the `TestBlock` get consumed in order to return `Self::Header`?

Author: it's mainly an convention of `T::into_*` methods in Rust.

}

/// TestHeader is a trait that defines the interface for a header produced by a host blockchain.
pub trait TestHeader: Clone + Debug + Into<Any> {
    /// The type of consensus state can be extracted from the header.
    type ConsensusState: ConsensusState + Into<AnyConsensusState> + From<Self> + Clone + Debug;

    /// The height of the block, as recorded in the header.
    fn height(&self) -> Height;

    /// The timestamp of the block, as recorded in the header.
    fn timestamp(&self) -> Timestamp;

    /// Extract the consensus state from the header.

>     fn into_consensus_state(self) -> Self::ConsensusState;

Reviewer: Similar question here: why `self` and not `&self`?

Author: I used `T::into_*` convention in Rust.

}
```

> ### Decoupling IbcContext and Host environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3. Decoupling IbcContext and Host environment
```

> Currently, `MockContext` implements the top validation and execution context of
> `ibc-rs`. It contains other host-specific data e.g. `host_chain_id`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, `MockContext` implements the top-level [validation](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/v0.51.0/ibc-core/ics25-handler/src/entrypoint.rs#L45) and [execution](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/v0.51.0/ibc-core/ics25-handler/src/entrypoint.rs#L112) contexts of
`ibc-rs`, as opposed to the more granular contexts of each of the individual handlers. It contains other host-specific data e.g. `host_chain_id`,
```

> `block_time` - that are irrelevant to the IBC context directly. If we think

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`block_time` - that are not directly relevant to the IBC context. If we think
```

> `MockContext` as a real blockchain context, the `MockContext` represents the top
> runtime - which contains the IBC module. So we implement the validation and
> execution context on `MockIbcStore`, instead of `MockContext`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of `MockContext` as a real blockchain context, the `MockContext` represents the top-
level runtime; it contains `MockIbcStore`, which is a more appropriate candidate to implement the validation and execution contexts than the `MockContext` itself.
```

With this, the `MockContext` contains two decoupled parts - the host and the IBC
module.

> ### Chain-like interface for `MockContext`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 4. Chain-like interface for `MockContext`
```

With the above changes, we can refactor the `MockContext` to have
blockchain-like interfaces.

> The `MockContext` should have `end_block`, `produce_block` and `begin_block` to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `MockContext` should have `end_block`, `produce_block`, and `begin_block` to
```

> mimic the real blockchain environment such as Cosmos-SDK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mimic real blockchain environments, such as the Cosmos-SDK.
```

```rs
impl<S, H> MockContext<S, H>
where
    S: ProvableStore + Debug,
    H: TestHost,
{
    pub fn ibc_store_mut(&mut self) -> &mut MockIbcStore<S>;
    pub fn host_mut(&mut self) -> &mut H;

    pub fn generate_genesis_block(&mut self, genesis_time: Timestamp);
    pub fn begin_block(&mut self);
    pub fn end_block(&mut self);
    pub fn produce_block(&mut self, block_time: Duration);
}
```

> ### ICS23 compatible proof generation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 5. ICS23 compatible proof generation
```

> With the new ability of proof generation, we can now test the Tendermint light

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the new proof generation capabilities, we can now test the Tendermint light
```

clients. But we need our proofs to be ICS23 compatible. ICS23 expects the IBC

> store root to be committed at a commitment prefix at a top store in the host

Reviewer: ```suggestion
store root to be committed at a commitment prefix at a top-level store in the host
```

environment.

For this, we add an extra store in `MockContext` where the `MockIbcStore`
commits its storage root at its
[commitment prefix](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/v0.51.0/ibc-testkit/src/testapp/ibc/core/core_ctx.rs#L127-L129)
key.

So the `MockContext` is finalized as:

```rs

> pub struct MockGenericContext<S, H>

Reviewer: Is this `MockGenericContext` type the same as the above `MockContext` type, or is it a distinct type? If it's not distinct, let's make that more explicit, for example by using diff highlighting syntax:
```diff
-pub struct MockContext<S, H>
+pub struct MockGenericContext<S, H>
where
    S: ProvableStore + Debug,
    H: TestHost,
{
+   pub main_store: S,
+   pub host: H,
+   pub ibc_store: MockIbcStore<S>,

    pub fn ibc_store_mut(&mut self) -> &mut MockIbcStore<S>;
    pub fn host_mut(&mut self) -> &mut H;

    pub fn generate_genesis_block(&mut self, genesis_time: Timestamp);
    pub fn begin_block(&mut self);
    pub fn end_block(&mut self);
    pub fn produce_block(&mut self, block_time: Duration);
}
```

Author: You're right. We have it this way in the feature branch. But for the sake of this ADR, I wanted to keep it simple - as if we were just extending the `MockContext` on `v0.51.0`.

In the feature branch, `MockContext<H>` becomes `MockGenericContext<DefaultIbcStore, H>` to keep the tests simple.

Let me know what you feel. If you want to keep `MockGenericContext` - I will add the relevant explanation.

Reviewer: Ok, then I think it would be clearer if we don't introduce the `MockGenericContext` name here, and just stick with `MockContext`; otherwise, it is a little confusing.

where
    S: ProvableStore + Debug,
    H: TestHost
{
    pub main_store: S,
    pub host: H,
    pub ibc_store: MockIbcStore<S>,
}
```

Now the `MockIbcStore` can generate proofs that contain the proofs in its store
and commitment prefix. But it has to know the proofs of its commitment prefix of
the previous heights.

So we add an extra store in `MockIbcStore` to store the proofs from previous

> heights. This is similar to storing `HostConsensusState` of previous heights.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
heights. This is similar to storing `HostConsensusState`s of previous heights.
```

```rs
#[derive(Debug)]
pub struct MockIbcStore<S>
where
    S: ProvableStore + Debug,
{
    ...

>     /// Map of host consensus states

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// Map of host consensus states.
```

    pub host_consensus_states: Arc<Mutex<BTreeMap<u64, AnyConsensusState>>>,

>     /// Map of proofs of ibc commitment prefix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    /// Map of proofs of ibc commitment prefix.
```

    pub ibc_commiment_proofs: Arc<Mutex<BTreeMap<u64, CommitmentProof>>>,
}
```

The storing of the IBC store root at the IBC commitment prefix happens in the

> end block. The storing of proofs and host consensus states happens in the

Reviewer: Should this be `end_block` to denote that the storing of the store root and commitment prefix happens when `end_block` is called?

Author: Good point. Here is my view: `end_block` doesn't produce the block as the top-level store is not committed yet. So, the context doesn't have access to the latest block yet. Hence, the latest block metadata is stored after producing the block, which is the next `begin_block`.

If you agree, I should add this logic in the doc - as this is a valid question that you raised.

Reviewer: So I think what you're saying is that the storing of the root at the commitment prefix happens in the _most recent_ block (i.e. not actually in a call to `end_block`)? If that's the case, it might be clearer to clarify that by saying "most recent block" instead of "end block", as that could be easily confused with the `end_block` function name.

Author: ah. I think I misread your comment before. Yes, it happens in the `end_block` procedure.

To avoid confusion, here is the order:

- procedure end_block
  - storing ibc_root in commitment_prefix in main_store
- procedure produce_block
  - commits the main_store
  - produces a block with its latest root
  - push the block in the blockchain
- procedure being_block
  - store host consensus state from the latest block
  - store commitment_prefix proof in the latest block

`begin_block` of the `MockContext`.

> ### Integration Test via `RelayerContext`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 6. Integration Tests via `RelayerContext`
```

With all the above changes, we can now write an integration test that tests the

> IBC workflow - client creation, connection handshake, channel handshake and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IBC workflow - client creation, connection handshake, channel handshake, and
```

> packet relay for any host environment that implements `TestHost`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
packet relaying for any host environment that implements `TestHost`.
```

This can be done by reading the
[IBC events](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/v0.51.0/ibc-testkit/src/testapp/ibc/core/types.rs#L95)
from `MockIbcStore` and creating and sending the IBC messages via
[`MockContext::deliver`](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/v0.51.0/ibc-testkit/src/testapp/ibc/core/types.rs#L696).

### Miscellaneous

To achieve blockchain-like interfaces, we removed `max_history_size` and
`host_chain_id` from `MockContext`.

- `max_history_size`: We generate all the blocks till a block height. This gives
  us reproducibility. If we need to prune some older block data, we use a
  dedicated `prune_block_till` to prune older blocks. This makes our tests more
  descriptive about the assumption of the test scenarios.
- `host_chain_id`: The IBC runtime does not depend on `host_chain_id` directly.
  The `TestHost` trait implementation is responsible for generating the blocks
  with the necessary data.

Also to minimize verbosity while writing tests (as Rust doesn't support default
arguments to function parameters), we want to use some parameter builders. For

> that, we can use [`TypedBuilder`](https://crates.io/crates/typed-builder) crate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that, we can use the [`TypedBuilder`](https://crates.io/crates/typed-builder) crate.
```

## Status

Proposed

## Consequences

This ADR pays the technical debt of the existing testing framework.

### Positive

> The future tests will be more readable and maintainable. The test framework

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Future tests will be more readable and maintainable. The test framework
```

> becomes modular and leverages Rust's trait system. Even the `ibc-rs` users may
> benefit from this framework to test their implementations of `ibc-rs`
> components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
becomes modular and leverages Rust's trait system. `ibc-rs` users may
benefit from this framework, which allows them to test their host implementations of `ibc-rs` components.
```

### Negative

This requires a significant refactoring of the existing tests. Since this may

> take some time, the parallel development on `main` branch may conflict with this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
take some time, the parallel development on the `main` branch may conflict with this
```

    fn advance_block(
        &mut self,
        commitment_root: Vec<u8>,
        block_time: Duration,
        params: &Self::BlockParams,
    );

    /// Generate a block at the given height and timestamp, using the provided parameters.
    fn generate_block(
        &self,
        commitment_root: Vec<u8>,
        height: u64,
        timestamp: Timestamp,
        params: &Self::BlockParams,
    ) -> Self::Block;

    /// Generate a client state using the block at the given height and the provided parameters.
    fn generate_client_state(
        &self,
        latest_height: &Height,
        params: &Self::LightClientParams,
    ) -> Self::ClientState;
}

/// TestBlock is a trait that defines the interface for a block produced by a host blockchain.
pub trait TestBlock: Clone + Debug {
    /// The type of header that can be extracted from the block.
    type Header: TestHeader;

    /// The height of the block.
    fn height(&self) -> Height;

    /// The timestamp of the block.
    fn timestamp(&self) -> Timestamp;

    /// Extract the header from the block.
    fn into_header(self) -> Self::Header;
}

> /// TestHeader is a trait that defines the interface for a header produced by a host blockchain.

Reviewer 2: Should this comment be pointing to the "IBC header submitted by relayers" instead of the "header produced by chain"?
(As I see in principle this trait has been implemented on the [TendermintHeader](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/2acb2fa1324dd838d5165a5819a20cedaa525025/ibc-testkit/src/hosts/tendermint.rs#L200-L216) which is a wrapper of the IBC Header.)

Author: Yes, you're right!

Author: d9f5c9e

# ADR 009: Revamp IBC integration test framework

## Changelog

- 04-03-2024: Initial draft

## Context

The current framework in the IBC testkit uses

> [existing types and injects state or dependency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[existing types and injects state and/or dependencies
```

manually](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/v0.51.0/ibc-testkit/tests/core/ics02_client/update_client.rs#L574-L578).
Sometimes, it uses

> [semantically wrong data as mock data](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/v0.51.0/ibc-testkit/src/testapp/ibc/core/types.rs#L320).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[semantically incorrect data as mock data](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/v0.51.0/ibc-testkit/src/testapp/ibc/core/types.rs#L320).
```

Because of this, tests with customizable steps and fixed fixtures became ad-hoc
and unmaintainable.

> To overcome this, we need to improve our test framework that allows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To overcome this, we need to improve our test framework such that it allows:
```

- testing different implementations (traits).
- succinct tests (useful `util` methods).
- improving test coverage (i.e. validating Merkle proof generation).

> - integration tests exercising the IBC workflow (relayer-like interface)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- testing different implementations and traits.
- composition of succinct tests with useful `util` methods.
- validating of code paths that were not easily testable before, i.e. Merkle proof generation.
- simulating a more realistic IBC workflow, using real IBC and relayer interfaces.
```

## Decision

The main goal of this proposal is to create a test framework that is modular and

> closer to the real blockchain environment. This should also make the existing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
closer to a real blockchain environment. This should also make the existing
```

> tests succinct and readable. Instead of bootstrapping the mock data, we should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tests more succinct and readable. Instead of bootstrapping the mock data that tests use, we should
```

use valid steps to generate it - so that we know the exact steps to reach a
state to reproduce in a real environment.

To achieve this, we have broken down the proposal into sub-proposals:

### 1. Adopt a Merkle store for the test framework

The current framework uses `HashMap` and `HashSet` to store data. This works for
many test scenarios, but it fails to test proof-sensitive scenarios. Because of
this, we don't have any connection, channel handshake, or packet relay tests
that cover the Tendermint light client.

We generalize
[`MockContext`](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/v0.51.0/ibc-testkit/src/testapp/ibc/core/types.rs#L103)
to use a Merkle store which is used for IBC Context's store. For concrete or
default implementations, we can use the IAVL Merkle store implementation from
`informalsystems/basecoin-rs`.

### 2. Modularize the host environment

> Currently, we are using `Mock` and `SyntheticTendermint` variants of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, we are using `Mock` and `SyntheticTendermint` variants of the
```

    /// The type of consensus state can be extracted from the header.
    type ConsensusState: ConsensusState + Into<AnyConsensusState> + From<Self> + Clone + Debug;

    /// The height of the block, as recorded in the header.
    fn height(&self) -> Height;

    /// The timestamp of the block, as recorded in the header.
    fn timestamp(&self) -> Timestamp;

    /// Extract the consensus state from the header.
    fn into_consensus_state(self) -> Self::ConsensusState;
}
```

### 3. Decoupling IbcContext and Host environment

Currently, `MockContext` implements the top-level
[validation](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/v0.51.0/ibc-core/ics25-handler/src/entrypoint.rs#L45)
and
[execution](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/v0.51.0/ibc-core/ics25-handler/src/entrypoint.rs#L112)
contexts of `ibc-rs`, as opposed to the more granular contexts of each of the
individual handlers. It contains other host-specific data e.g. `host_chain_id`,
`block_time` - that are not directly relevant to the IBC context. If we think of
`MockContext` as a real blockchain context, the `MockContext` represents the
top- level runtime; it contains `MockIbcStore`, which is a more appropriate

> candidate to implement the validation and execution contexts than the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
candidate to implement the validation and execution contexts for than the
```

commits its storage root at its
[commitment prefix](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc-rs/blob/v0.51.0/ibc-testkit/src/testapp/ibc/core/core_ctx.rs#L127-L129)
key.

So the `MockContext` is finalized as:

```rs
pub struct MockContext<S, H>
where
    S: ProvableStore + Debug,
    H: TestHost
{
    pub main_store: S,
    pub host: H,
    pub ibc_store: MockIbcStore<S>,
}
```

Now the `MockIbcStore` can generate proofs that contain the proofs in its store
and commitment prefix. But it has to know the proofs of its commitment prefix of
the previous heights.

So we add an extra store in `MockIbcStore` to store the proofs from previous
heights. This is similar to storing `HostConsensusState`s of previous heights.

```rs
#[derive(Debug)]
pub struct MockIbcStore<S>
where
    S: ProvableStore + Debug,
{
    ...
    /// Map of host consensus states.
    pub host_consensus_states: Arc<Mutex<BTreeMap<u64, AnyConsensusState>>>,
    /// Map of proofs of ibc commitment prefix.
    pub ibc_commiment_proofs: Arc<Mutex<BTreeMap<u64, CommitmentProof>>>,
}
```

The storing of the IBC store root at the IBC commitment prefix happens in the

> end block. The storing of proofs and host consensus states happens in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`end_block` procedure. `produce_block` commits the main store, produces a block with its latest root, and pushes the block to the blockchain. The storing of proofs and host consensus states happens in the
```

contexts of `ibc-rs`, as opposed to the more granular contexts of each of the
individual handlers. It contains other host-specific data e.g. `host_chain_id`,
`block_time` - that are not directly relevant to the IBC context. If we think of
`MockContext` as a real blockchain context, the `MockContext` represents the
top-level runtime; it contains `MockIbcStore`, which is a more appropriate
candidate to implement the validation and execution contexts for than the
`MockContext` itself.

With this, the `MockContext` contains two decoupled parts - the host and the IBC
module.

### 4. Chain-like interface for `MockContext`

With the above changes, we can refactor the `MockContext` to have
blockchain-like interfaces.

The `MockContext` should have `end_block`, `produce_block`, and `begin_block` to
mimic real blockchain environments, such as the Cosmos-SDK.

```rs
impl<S, H> MockContext<S, H>
where
    S: ProvableStore + Debug,
    H: TestHost,
{
    pub fn ibc_store_mut(&mut self) -> &mut MockIbcStore<S>;
    pub fn host_mut(&mut self) -> &mut H;

    pub fn generate_genesis_block(&mut self, genesis_time: Timestamp);
    pub fn begin_block(&mut self);
    pub fn end_block(&mut self);

>     pub fn produce_block(&mut self, block_time: Duration);

Reviewer: Should we change the function signatures to match the interface presented by `StoreGenericTestContext`?

Author: ah yes. Nice catch ! I did not add all the methods here. Just the important ones.

557c17a0
